Donald Trump’s nomination





SHORTLY after Donald Trump was confirmed as the Republican nominee, a pair of men wearing straw boaters wandered around outside the convention centre, weighing up the merits of tacos versus hot dogs. A man wearing an elephant hat was being filmed by a woman on her mobile phone, while two women wearing red skirts with white elephants on them stood nearby. People held doors open for each other. This was a transformative moment in the history of one of the world’s great political parties, but it hardly seemed so to those enjoying Cleveland’s evening sunshine while the roll call of state delegates concluded inside. There was no Wagnerian soundtrack, just some snatches of KC and the Sunshine Band drifting out from the hall. This is how a big moment in history sounds.
At the beginning of the convention, Donald Trump’s campaign manager said that his candidate was planning to copy Richard Nixon’s 1968 campaign, presenting himself as the law-and-order candidate. That election saw the birth of the Southern Strategy, which exploited white resentment after the Civil Rights Act. It saw violence at the Democratic convention in Chicago, the race riots in 11 mostly northern cities that accelerated the flight of whites to the suburbs, and protests against the Vietnam war. America in 2016 is not like America in 1968. Violent crime has fallen by more than half over the past 20 years, the economy is growing at a steady, unspectacular rate, illegal border crossings are at a low level, there are signs of racial progress for those who want to see them. Outside the convention, the violence that many predicted has yet to materialise.

The country described within the Quicken Loans Arena is very different. It is a lawless, borderless place, threatened by terrorists and run by crooks. The most memorable moments of the first evening came in painful speeches given by bereaved parents, whose children had been killed by illegal immigrants or by terrorists in Libya. “I blame Hillary Clinton personally for the death of my son,” said one. This stuff was interspersed with bizarre moments from some formerly famous people, notable only for their willingness to say nice things about the nominee. “Let’s make America America again,” implored Scott Baio, an actor from “Happy Days”, which broadcast its final episode in 1984. A former underwear model went from praising Mr Trump on stage to declaring in a TV studio that Barack Obama was a Muslim.
While all this was going on, Mr Trump gave interviews that drew attention away from his own convention. Even when he is the star of the show, it seems, he cannot bear it when someone else’s face is on screen.
Evening two was supposed to be dedicated to the theme of jobs, but it was mostly about putting Mrs Clinton behind bars. The shouts of “Guilty!” and “Lock her up!” were loudest when Chris Christie spoke. Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, who has thrown in his lot with Mr Trump, was booed by the crowd. Paul Ryan, the House majority leader, gave a strange speech that flirted with praising Mr Trump, and then with condemning him, but ultimately did neither. The elected Republican who seemed most in tune with the mood was Jeff Sessions, who nominated Mr Trump with a tirade against “Obamatrade”. A woman who runs Mr Trump’s winery got a prime-time speaking slot, as did two of Mr Trump’s children. Ben Carson said something about Lucifer.
Thus far this convention has suggested that the Trump campaign is too strange, amateurish and pessimistic to triumph. The most persuasive case your correspondent has heard to the contrary came from Chris Wilson, a Republican pollster who worked for Ted Cruz in the primary. Mr Wilson says that the clashes between Trump supporters and protesters in Chicago in March—when Mr Trump announced and then cancelled a rally in a heavily African-American neighbourhood—moved the Cruz campaign polls away from their candidate towards Mr Trump by ten points almost overnight. The Republican nominee, he concluded, has the ability to create the conditions that favour him, by encouraging disorder and then promising to dispel it, in a way that no other candidate could. This is one way he could possibly win, but it remains unlikely: there do not seem to enough white, high-school educated voters to make his current strategy work.
To win in November, he also requires the acquiescence of other voter groups. This seems a more plausible route. As voters get even more fed up with this election they may decide that both candidates are as bad as each other, or merely decide to roll the dice out of boredom. If that happens, it would be the most absent-minded political revolution in American history.
Any further drama that ensues at this year's Republican affair will still pale in comparison with the rows and splits of yesteryear
Two passages of of her speech had been lifted from Michelle Obama’s address to the Democratic convention in 2008
Mr Ryan is a decent man who must chair the Republican convention that will nominate an indecent candidate for president
Optimistic Republicans will take comfort in the naming of Mike Pence, the governor of Indiana, as the candidate's vice-presidential pick
The type of populism that has propelled Donald Trump to the Republican nomination has a long history in America



Foreign takeovers in Britain





FOREIGN acquisitions have a bad reputation in Britain. Before Kraft, an American food-processing firm, swallowed Cadbury, a British confectioner, in 2010 it pledged not to outsource work abroad. Just days after the deal was done, it reneged. Small wonder, then, that the probable takeover of ARM Holdings, a Cambridge-based tech company, by SoftBank, a Japanese one, has people worried.
Britain welcomes monied foreigners with open arms. Its stock of inward foreign direct investment is bigger than that of anywhere but America and Hong Kong. In the past decade overseas investors have splurged £500 billion ($835 billion) to acquire nearly 2,000 British firms, almost three times the amount spent by British investors on acquisitions within Britain.

Foreign buy-outs increase demand for British assets and thus raise the pound’s value, making exporters less competitive. And foreign owners are popularly suspected of having a “home bias”, making decisions which benefit their country rather than Britain. ARM’s founder, Hermann Hauser, lamented that “what comes next for technology will not be decided in Britain any more, but in Japan.”
But the case against foreign investors does not stand up. A dear pound hardly helps exporters, but weak productivity is a bigger problem (in the manufacturing sector it is lower now than in 2011). And foreign owners seem to improve the situation. Economists reckon that about half the productivity gap between Britain and America is down to bad management. A paper by Nick Bloom of Stanford University and others shows that the David Brents can learn from the Jack Welches: when they take over British firms, American multinationals bring better technology and practices, lifting productivity by up to 10%.
These benefits are easiest to grasp in heavy industry, where measuring output is straightforward. A study by Simon Collinson, now of Birmingham University, looked at British Steel Strip Products, which formed an alliance with Japan’s Nippon Steel in the early 1990s. Japanese management practices had a clear impact: in a few years the percentage of steel rejected because it was too rusty declined from 2-3% to less than 0.5%.
As well as cutting down on tea-breaks and making factory lines sleeker, foreign owners seem to spend more for the future. Foreign-owned firms, which make up just 1% of Britain’s businesses, account for over half of British research-and-development spending. That boosts productivity and thus wages: a study by the OECD, a club of rich countries, found that in Britain wages in foreign-owned firms were about 5% higher than they would have been were the firm under British ownership.
Overseas owners also shake up supply chains, says Mr Collinson. One paper found that a ten-percentage-point increase in foreign presence in a British industry raised the total factor productivity (which captures the efficiency with which capital and labour are used) of that industry’s domestic producers by about 0.5%.
No one celebrates when higher productivity arises from laying off workers and foreign takeovers are, indeed, associated with job losses. But this is a feature of acquisitions in general, not of foreign ones in particular. Restricting buy-outs in order to protect jobs would ultimately depress living standards by keeping workers in inefficient companies. It is not always easy being at the mercy of global markets, but on balance Britain benefits from being open to foreign buyers. 



Obituary





IN THE city of Pune in Maharashstra, in 2012, Datta Phuge conceived a desire to display something no one else had. Something, that is, made of pure gold. As founder-floater of the Vakratunda Chit Fund, a slightly slippery credit society, he had any amount of gold in his possession or on his body: rings, bracelets, coins, mobile phone. He was in the habit of wearing 7kg of it a day, here and there. He had given a heap to his wife Seema, who began to find it a little boring to wear. But since gold was his passion and his chief way of showing how happy and fortunate he was, he wanted to flaunt it still more.

After chatting it over with his friends at Ranka Jewellers, he ordered a shirt made almost wholly of gold. It comprised 100,000 spangles and 14,000 gold flowers fixed to white velvet cloth, so that it could be folded away like any other shirt. Accessories were provided, also of 22-carat gold: necklaces, cuffs and a belt. Altogether, the outfit weighed 9.5kg. It took 15 craftsmen from West Bengal, working 16-hour days, more than two weeks to create it. And it cost 1.27 crore rupees, or $250,000.
Almost 13,000km away, across two oceans in Bermuda, Johnny Barnes in 1986 also decided to put on a prodigal display. He would stand at the Crow Lane roundabout in Hamilton, where most of the rush-hour traffic came past, and tell each passing motorist how sweet life was and how much he loved them. His days had long overflowed with happiness, in his garden and in his jobs as a railway electrician and a bus-driver, where he had taken up the habit of waving and smiling to anyone who passed as he ate his lunchtime sandwiches. He had lavished joy on his wife Belvina, “covering her with honey”, as he put it. But there was plenty left over.
For 30 years he went to the roundabout every weekday morning. He would rise at around 3am, walk two miles to his post, stay for six hours shouting “I love you!”, smiling and blowing kisses, and then walk home again. He was there in the heat, his wide-brimmed straw hat keeping off the sun, and there in the rain with his umbrella. Only storms deterred him and eventually, the creakings of old age. Over the years, he transmitted his radiant happiness to drivers hundreds of thousands of times.
Both Mr Barnes and Mr Phuge were taken for madmen at the start; but they justified themselves partly by the ambient culture. In India, Mr Phuge explained, everyone loved gold, and in Maharashtra they loved it even more. Politicians went laden with it and, as a man of political ambition himself, he hoped the shirt might get him noticed nationally. That was why he wore it not just to functions or events, but also when going casually around the town, causing a small sensation. For Mr Barnes, his extravagant love of Hamilton’s commuters came partly from Bermudans’ habit of saying “Good morning” anyway, partly from his genuine joy in the life God had blessed him with, and partly from the switching his mother had given him when he failed, as a child, to greet an old lady. Every day ever since, he had tried to spread happiness to as many people as possible.
Fame came rapidly. Mr Barnes was hailed as an icon of Bermuda, and in 1998 a statue of him was put up near the roundabout. Tourists from Africa and America came to be photographed with him and to buy his dollar postcards; he once waved to the Queen of England. Mr Phuge was on all the Marathi TV channels modelling his shirt, but also had BBC reporters and Canadians lining up at his front door; they were, his wife said, “even more sought-after than royals”. Both men were credited with powers to make gold, or happiness, increase. Mr Barnes, a Seventh-Day Adventist, often prayed with his visitors beside the road, and his rare absences were taken as bad omens. Mr Phuge (who always wore with his shirt a giant “Om” in crystals on a thick chain of gold) was believed to have the Midas touch, and was asked to bless houses. Both men hugely enjoyed the attention.
There were naysayers, of course. Those who were not so lucky, or in a bad mood, resented these continuous demonstrations of good fortune. Gentle Mr Barnes was condemned as a traffic hazard, and once had a bucket of water thrown over him. Mr Phuge was more justifiably attacked as a shady money-lender, parading in his gold while local farmers starved—and indeed while he, too, was deep in debt. When he strolled out in his shirt his heavily armed “boys” went too, to protect him.
Drawing the moralOn the night of July 14th, on his way to a party—but not, apparently, in the shirt—he was stoned to death by “friends” to whom he owed money. Nothing could have been further from the peaceful death of Johnny Barnes, in ripe old age and in the firm conviction he was heading home. The moral of the tale seems almost too easy to draw: the selfish flaunter of happiness, weighed down by gold, came to an awful end, while the selfless one, wearing his prodigious love so lightly, was praised and lamented.
Both men, though, left behind a deficit of magic. After Mr Phuge died, no one could find the wonderful gold shirt. It was not in the house, nor at Ranka Jewellers; rumour had it that a creditor from Mumbai had taken it away. As for Mr Barnes, people searched up and down, far and wide, for the true secret of his happiness; for that, too, had disappeared with him. 



Daily chart





FOR the first time in two decades the European Union is the biggest concern for voters, according to the July 2016 Economist/Ipsos MORI issues index. Ever since the referendum on EU membership was announced, Europe has been an increasingly important issue for Brits. But after the referendum result, worries about Europe jumped to their highest level since 1997 and, in doing so, overtook fears about health care and immigration. 
In the build-up to the referendum Remain campaigners were hopeful that a new surge in registrations would help their cause. Many of the new voters were young and, supposedly, more likely to plump for Britain to stay in the EU. But data from the Electoral Commission reveals that, in the first six months of this year, those registering to vote were more likely to hail from Eurosceptic areas than Europhile ones. Small wonder the Brexiters won by a margin of more than 1m voters. 









The dividing of America



Risking the Turkey-America friendship





SINCE the 1960s, whenever Turkey’s meddlesome generals have seized power, Turks have accused America of being responsible. After the botched coup attempt on July 15th by a cabal of mid-ranking generals and junior officers, the old reflex appeared again. Turkey’s labour minister, Suleyman Soylu, declared that America was behind the attempt to overthrow the country’s Islamist president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. (He vaguely cited the “activities” of unnamed American magazines as proof.) Pro-government media outlets teemed with conspiracy theories. In a column in Yeni Safak, a daily newspaper, Aydin Unal, an MP from Mr Erdogan’s Justice and Development party (AK), suggested that American army officers took part in the fighting. In previous decades such rants could be shrugged off. But this time they are part of an increasingly severe diplomatic crisis.
The reaction from John Kerry, America’s secretary of state, was uncharacteristically stiff. In a phone call to his Turkish opposite number, Mevlut Cavusoglu, on July 16th Mr Kerry said insinuations that America had played any role in the coup were “utterly false and harmful to our bilateral relations”. Speaking to an American news channel the following day, Mr Kerry warned Mr Erdogan against using the coup as an excuse to clamp down on his opponents. A wide-ranging purge, Mr Kerry said, “would be a great challenge to his relationship to Europe, to NATO and to all of us”.

AK is not heeding his advice. More than 7,000 people have been detained and thousands of judges and other bureaucrats purged. At least 11 online news portals associated with the opposition have been shut down. But the biggest source of friction is the presence in America of Fethullah Gulen, a cleric who leads a secretive Muslim sect, and whom the Turkish government accuses of masterminding the failed putsch.
Since 1999 Mr Gulen has been living in self-imposed exile in rural Pennsylvania. For years, Mr Erdogan has accused the imam, a former ally in his battle to declaw the army, of seeking to topple his government. The Turks demand that America hand him over. Yet Turkey has not formally requested Mr Gulen’s extradition; the file, over 1,000 pages long, has yet to be fully translated into English. Western diplomats reckon it will be padded with outlandish, conspiratorial claims, and that federal prosecutors will throw it out. Mr Erdogan would probably ramp up his anti-American rhetoric in response. Turkey’s prime minister, Binali Yildirim, has already warned that requiring “evidence” before booting out Mr Gulen would call America’s friendship with Turkey into doubt.
That would be nothing new. Relations with America have seesawed ever since 1952, when Turkey became NATO’s first mainly Muslim member. Back then, Turkey was prized as an ally against the Soviet Union. Today it is seen as a buffer between Europe and the Middle East, with its homicidal jihadists and millions of Syrian refugees. And continued access to Turkey’s Incirlik air-base is vital to the American-led war effort against Islamic State (IS). Some Western officials worry that Turkey will seal off the base if America refuses to hand over Mr Gulen.
Turkey’s relations with America were already strained by America’s support for the Syrian Kurdish militia groups known as the People’s Protection Units (YPG). The YPG are widely seen as the most effective force fighting IS in Syria, but they are closely linked to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), an outlawed guerrilla movement that has been fighting the Turkish state for decades in the name of Kurdish autonomy, and has carried out numerous terrorist attacks. Turkey views the YPG as terrorists too, and has repeatedly asked America to ditch them, only to be snubbed each time.
From the American perspective, Turkey has never been fully committed to the war against Islamist groups in Syria. For years, the Americans have pressed Turkey to do more to stop jihadist fighters slipping in and out of Syria to join up with (or carry out missions for) IS and other Islamist groups. It is in Turkey’s own interest to do so. IS has carried out several big terror attacks inside Turkey, including the suicide-bombing in June of Istanbul’s Ataturk airport. Few doubt it will strike again. 
Ash Carter, America’s defence secretary, makes no secret of his distaste for Turkey’s president. Calls to replace Incirlik with a base elsewhere in the region are growing louder in America’s Congress. Meanwhile, Mr Gulen may threaten Turkish stability, but nothing like as seriously as the jihadists both inside and outside the country. Turkey needs friendship with America more than ever. Instead, in a paroxysm of post-coup paranoia, Mr Erdogan is putting the entire alliance at risk. 



The problem with fisheries  extends to the entire ocean





THE high seas are a lawless place. That is no metaphor. Beyond the jurisdiction of governments, beyond even the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which was agreed in 1982 and came into force in 1994, they have been subjected to few laws over the centuries besides the prohibition of piracy and slave-trading, and the regulation of submarine cables and pipelines.
In 2001, though, they became a little less lawless. That was the year the United Nations’ Fish Stocks Agreement (UNFSA) came into effect. The UNFSA tried to impose some order on high-seas fishing, an activity not previously considered to matter enough for people to care about it.
Fishing beyond those parts of the ocean within 200 nautical miles of land, codified by UNCLOS as exclusive economic zones (EEZs), began about six decades ago. It ramped up in the late 1970s when Australian and New Zealand vessels started casting their nets specially for deepwater species. Other countries have now joined and overtaken them (see chart).





Though the fuel needed to get to the high seas is pricey, taxpayers often pick up part of the tab in the form of government subsidies. Such subsidies, combined with overexploitation of fisheries closer to land, have made the high seas attractive to fishermen. The consequence, according to the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation, is that they, too, are being pillaged. Already, two-thirds of their stocks are being fished beyond sustainable limits and, as they once provided a haven for fish everywhere, yields in EEZs are suffering, too.
The UNFSA attempts to regulate high-seas fishing through clubs called Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMOs). The 17 RFMOs set rules supposed to be binding on member countries (unlike about 50 other fisheries bodies which mainly provide advice). Some are confined to EEZs. But those that do extend their remit to the high seas attempt to protect two groups of fish. The first are straddling stocks, species such as cod, halibut and pollock whose habitats, and therefore populations, stretch beyond EEZs into the high seas. The second are migratory animals such as tuna and swordfish, which travel long distances between feeding and breeding grounds.
RFMOs’ decisions about how much fishing to allow are supposed to be guided by ecological reality. The overall health of an area’s stocks, for example, is often assessed by working out how many of a species there would be in that area if there were no fishing at all (a quantity known as its unfished biomass), and then estimating how far short of this level stocks currently fall. In an active fishery, they obviously will fall short of it, but the optimal shortfall is shown by a second number, the maximum sustainable yield. This is the peak crop that can be taken from a fishery, year after year after year.
The old plans and the sea
Translating these numbers into fishing practice can be hard. For example, two species with the same unfished biomass may, because of their ways of life, be under different levels of strain from net-casters. Fishing optimally for one might threaten the other. But data on by-catch—species netted that are not a boat’s main quarry—which would illuminate such differences, are difficult to come by, for countries are often loth to share them.
Moreover, even if data are true, actions based on them may be questionable. In 2014, for example, an RFMO called the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission reduced the bluefin-tuna catch in its jurisdiction from 5,500 tonnes a year to 3,300 tonnes. That sounds like common sense, but the cut recommended by the commission’s scientific advisers was to 2,750 tonnes, so the species is still at risk.
Tuna seem particularly vulnerable to this sort of thing. Since 2010, the fraction of tuna stocks regarded as over-exploited has risen from 28% to 36%. Sometimes, indeed, matters descend into farce. In 2015 the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, another RFMO, agreed to a 23% reduction in the quota for the Atlantic bigeye tuna after warnings from its scientists. But this will help little, for the species is now so rare that catches had fallen below the newly approved level when the change was promulgated.
There are some signs of progress. In May another RFMO, the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, adopted tighter rules to help ailing skipjack-tuna stocks. This, according to Mireille Thom, a marine-policy specialist at the World Wide Fund for Nature, a global conservation charity, was the first time a body responsible for tuna has acted to prevent a stock from collapsing, rather than reacting to its collapse.
Skipjacks and their kin are migratory species. The state of straddling stocks can be even harder to determine. No one has reliable information on how they fare in the western central Pacific, the eastern and western central Atlantic and the Indian oceans. Some RFMOs attempt to act responsibly amid the murk anyway. The Southeast Atlantic Fisheries Organisation has imposed catch limits on certain species, such as orange roughy, armourhead and cardinal fish, although how much these are exploited is unknown. And many RFMOs say they want to care for marine ecosystems, even if their translation of that intention into action is patchy.

Possibly, they could learn lessons from one other organisation that has high-seas jurisdiction, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. This was established by international convention in 1982 and has 25 members. It was set up to prevent a repeat, in the late 20th century, of the unfettered ravaging of Antarctic wildlife (especially whales and seals) that characterised the 19th and early-20th centuries.
Under the commission’s aegis, reported catches of krill, Antarctic toothfish and other species of the Southern Ocean have fallen to a third of their levels in the 1980s and 1990s. That has been achieved by the long-term closure of certain areas to fishing efforts directed at particular prey, such as toothfish. This ensures that wildlife have enough food. The Ross Sea alone is home to almost 30,000 pairs of emperor penguins and 21,000 minke whales.
Even the Antarctic commission, however, struggles at times. For example, China and Russia oppose efforts to create the world’s largest marine reserve in the Ross Sea. Like an RFMO, the commission is only as strong as its most reticent members. Better data-gathering and greater sharing of the information discovered should at least make such reticence harder to justify.



The World Bank hires a famous contrarian





IT HAS been a while since a chief economist of the World Bank attracted much attention. In the 1990s, when Larry Summers and Joseph Stiglitz held the job, those occupying the position were often at the centre of heated debates on economic policy. Mr Stiglitz, a fierce critic of the conditions imposed by international organisations like the International Monetary Fund on countries affected by the crises of the late 1990s, was dismissed from the position for his heresies. Since then chief economists have been less outspoken.
That may change, however, with the appointment of Paul Romer, of New York University, as successor to Kaushik Basu (previously an economist at Cornell University and an adviser to the Indian government). Mr Romer is an intriguing figure: a respected economist, an expansive and unorthodox thinker on issues of economic development and an occasionally fierce critic of the field of economics itself.

Mr Romer made a name for himself in the 1980s and 1990s, when the hottest topic in macroeconomics was growth—in particular, why some countries managed it while others did not. Prevailing models of growth assigned an important role to technological change, but lacked a convincing explanation for how it came about. Instead, the models treated new ideas a bit like manna from heaven, arriving in a mysterious and unpredictable manner.
Mr Romer sought to change that. His work made the development of new ideas “endogenous”, meaning that it sought to account for them, rather than writing them off as “exogenous” surprises. In his “endogenous growth” theory, new ideas materialise as firms invest in physical capital or research and development, creating knowledge that spills over to the rest of the economy. That suggests that open economies, with institutions that encourage investment in physical and human capital, ought to do best.
The importance of the quality of institutions and of the dissemination of innovation led Mr Romer to focus on urban areas, which are often hotbeds for the creation and transmission of ideas. That focus, in turn, sparked a radical notion of economic development oriented around “charter cities”. Poor countries, he argued, should create new cities and give them leeway to experiment with daring economic and political reforms. Such reforms should be easier to implement on the relatively blank slate of a charter city than in existing population centres. Such new cities might then follow the model of Hong Kong or Shenzhen, becoming economic powerhouses in their own right, as well as proof for the rest of the economy of the benefits of economic reform.
Mr Romer has sought to interest governments in the idea, so far without much success. He ended his involvement with an experiment in Honduras over worries about accountability within the proposed charter city. His new platform at the World Bank will presumably give the idea a boost.
More recently Mr Romer has upbraided his fellow economists. He criticises the growing taste for obscure prose and “mathiness”—arcane equations in economic papers that are so hard to follow they allow their authors to avoid close scrutiny. If economics is to benefit society, he argues, researchers need to make arguments which are clear enough to be understood, tested and disproved.
Many question the relevance of the World Bank in a world in which China, which has long defied the World Bank’s prescriptions, is the poster child for development and is building an alternative set of development institutions. The sort of bold and challenging ideas for which Mr Romer is known might be just what it needs. 



Why Nice was an unsurprising location for a terrorist attack
 
 
 
 





AMONG the distressing questions that crowd the French consciousness after the latest terrorist horror, one of the more familiar is: why France? This was the third major attack on French soil since the Charlie Hebdo killings in January 2015, and the bloodiest ever in France after the Bataclan murders of November last year. It is hard for many French to understand why their country has suffered so much more than others in Europe. But this latest attack raises an even more puzzling question: why Nice?
With its ornate churches and palm-tree-fringed beaches, Nice is best known as a tourist destination. Less well-known is the fact that it faces one of France’s most intractable problems of Islamic radicalisation outside the Paris region. French news reports have named the suspect in Thursday’s atrocity as Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, a French citizen of Tunisian origin—and a resident of the city he attacked.

By the start of this year, at least 55 residents of Nice and other towns in the department of Alpes-Maritimes, which covers the Côte d’Azur, had left to fight in Syria or Iraq. That included 11 members of a single family. The department’s government recently closed down five underground prayer houses suspected of preaching violent Islamism. (In total there are roughly 40 mosques in and around Nice.) Increasingly worried about the flow of jihadists, Alpes-Maritimes was one of the first departments to put in place an early-warning system for families, schools and local services to try to prevent them from leaving for Syria, and to refer individuals at risk of radicalisation to specialist units.
Like most big cities in France, Nice has a big Muslim population; several were killed in the lorry attack. Concentrated in the tower blocks that fill the steep inland valleys a short drive from the coast, the neighbourhoods supply a share of ready young minds on which local jihadist recruiters prey. One in particular, Omar Omsen, also known as Omar Diaby, was well known to the local intelligence services and was thought to have been killed in Syria last year—although recent reports suggest that he is still alive, and may have faked his death.
It remains to be seen whether Omsen has any links to the perpetrator of the latest attack, but he certainly established an efficient centre of jihadism in the city. Born in Senegal, but raised on a housing estate in the suburb of Ariane, he was believed to have been behind the recruitment of the 11-member family who travelled to Syria from Nice. Linked to Jabhat al-Nusra, the al-Qaeda-linked group in Syria and rival to Islamic State, Omsen specialised in French propaganda videos, many of which proved popular on YouTube.
Last year, in a separate case, two teenage boys were taken off a plane at Nice airport before take-off, after the authorities received an alert that they were heading for jihad. In yet another case, a mother tried to bring a lawsuit against the French state for failing to stop her 16-year-old son leaving Nice airport for Syria, via Turkey, along with three others from the city. Yet another jihadist cell, known as Cannes-Torcy (dismantled by the police between 2012 and 2014), specifically targeted Nice. A returnee from Nice who had spent 16 months in Syria was arrested shortly after returning to France in January 2014. It is understood that he had been sent back to carry out a suicide bombing, at a time when no such attack had yet been carried out on French soil.





Faced with this spread of radicalism, the Alpes-Maritimes department has been at the forefront of French efforts to fight it. It has set up a special counter-radicalisation cell, with weekly meetings to analyse the alerts it receives from teachers, social workers, policemen and prison officers, all of whom have been trained by psychologists and others to look for signs of radicalisation. Since 2014, the department has recorded 522 such alerts, including 120 concerning youth under the age of 18.
Officials in the department were particularly concerned about public security earlier this year, when Nice held its annual carnival—a parade of festive floats along the Promenade des Anglais, where the latest attack took place (see map above). The route was sealed off with roadblocks and panels of temporary walling to allow access only to spectators with tickets. There was much relief at the time when all went safely.
Such outdoor events have been the main security worry for France this year, in particular during the Euro 2016 football tournament, which concluded on July 10th without any attacks. But intelligence officials have continued to warn that crowded places, such as shopping centres and public transport, are vulnerable. The latest attack proved them cruelly right. The French government has now announced that the national state of emergency will be extended once again. Introduced after last November’s attacks, it was due to expire in July, but will now continue until October 26th. An emergency response is now becoming, in France, a chillingly permanent state of full alert. 
Dig deeper: The attack in Nice suggests no end to the terrorist threat menacing France (July 2016)From Nice: Inside France’s fight against radical Islamist ideas (April 2016)



Theresa May’s new cabinet





Theresa May became Britain’s second female prime minister on July 13th. In her first speech outside 10 Downing Street she promised a government that would be driven by the interests of ordinary people and not the “privileged few”. So far her cabinet appointments reflect that. Some 70% of the newly appointed ministers were educated in state schools. This is not representative of the country as a whole, and a large number of Mrs May’s state-educated ministers came through the selective grammar-school system. Even so, Britain's new cabinet looks a bit more like Britain than that of her predecessor, David Cameron.



Smaller rivals are assaulting the world’s biggest brands





THEY make some of the world’s best-loved products. Their logos are instantly recognisable, their advertising jingles seared in shoppers’ brains. For investors, they promise steady returns in turbulent times. They seem to be getting ever bigger: on June 30th Mondelez International made a $23 billion bid for Hershey to create the world’s biggest confectioner; and on July 7th Danone, the world’s largest yogurt maker, agreed to buy WhiteWave Foods, a natural-food group, for $12.5 billion. Yet trouble lurks for the giants in consumer packaged goods (CPG), which also include firms such as General Mills, Nestlé, Procter & Gamble and Unilever. As one executive admits in a moment of candour, “We’re kind of fucked.”
For a hint of the problem they face, take the example of Daniel Lubetzky, who began peddling his fruit-and-nut bars in health-food stores: his KIND bars are now ubiquitous, stacked in airports and Walmarts. Or that of Michael Dubin and Mark Levine, entrepreneurs irked by expensive razors, who began shipping cheaper ones directly to consumers five years ago. Their Dollar Shave Club now controls 5% of America’s razor market.

Such stories abound. From 2011 to 2015 large CPG companies lost nearly three percentage points of market share in America, according to a joint study by the Boston Consulting Group and IRI, a consultancy and data provider, respectively. In emerging markets local competitors are a growing headache for multinational giants. Nestlé, the world’s biggest food company, has missed its target of 5-6% sales growth for three years running.
For a time, size gave CPG companies a staggering advantage. Centralising decisions and consolidating manufacturing helped firms expand margins. Deep pockets meant companies could spend millions on a flashy television advertisement, then see sales rise. Firms distributed goods to a vast network of stores, paying for prominent placement on shelves.
Yet these advantages are not what they once were. Consolidating factories has made companies more vulnerable to the swing of a particular currency, points out Nik Modi of RBC Capital Markets, a bank. The impact of television adverts is fading, as consumers learn about products on social media and from online reviews. At the same time, barriers to entry are falling for small firms. They can outsource production and advertise online. Distribution is getting easier, too: a young brand may prove itself with online sales, then move into big stores. Financing mirrors the same trend: last year investors poured $3.3 billion into private CPG firms, according to CB Insights, a data firm—up by 58% from 2014 and a whopping 638% since 2011.
Most troublesome, the lumbering giants are finding it hard to keep up with fast-changing consumer markets. Ali Dibadj of Sanford C. Bernstein, a research firm, points out that some consumers in middle-income countries began by assuming Western products were superior. As their economies grew, local players often proved more attuned to shoppers’ needs. Since 2004 big emerging economies have seen a surge of local and regional companies, according to data compiled by RBC. In China, for example, Yunnan Baiyao Group accounts for 10% of the toothpaste market, with sales growing by 45% each year since 2004. In Brazil Botica Comercial Farmacêutica sells nearly 30% of perfume. And in India Ghari Industries now peddles more than 17% of detergent.
In America and Europe, the world’s biggest consumer markets, many firms have been similarly leaden-footed. If a shopper wants a basic product, he can choose from cheap, store-brand goods from the likes of Aldi and Walmart. But if a customer wants to pay more for a product, it may not be for a traditional big brand. This may be because shoppers trust little brands more than established ones. One-third of American consumers surveyed by Deloitte, a consultancy, said they would pay at least 10% more for the “craft” version of a good, a greater share than would pay extra for convenience or innovation. Interest in organic products has been a particular challenge for big manufacturers whose packages list such tasty-sounding ingredients as sodium benzoate and Yellow 6.
All this has provided a big opening for smaller firms. In recent years they contributed to a proliferation of new products (see chart). For instance, America now boasts more than 4,000 craft brewers, up by 200% in the past decade. For a sign of the times, look no further than Wilde, which sells snack bars made of baked meat. The bars, revolting to some, may appeal to the herd of weekend triathletes who want to eat like cave men.





Big companies have been trying to respond. One answer is to focus more. In 2014 Procter & Gamble said it would sell off or consolidate about 100 brands, to devote itself to top products such as Gillette razors and Tide detergent. Mondelez, the seller of Oreo biscuits and Cadbury’s chocolate, is spending more to understand who snacks on what, and why.
But the most notable strategy has been to buy other firms and cut costs. 3G, a Brazilian private-equity firm, looms over the industry. It has slashed budgets at Heinz, a 147-year-old company it bought in 2013; then Kraft, which it merged with Heinz in 2015; as well as Anheuser-Busch InBev, a beer behemoth poised to swallow SABMiller. Heinz’s profit margin widened from 18% to 28% in just two years, according to Sanford C. Bernstein.
Big firms are also acquiring or backing smaller rivals. In 2013 two American food companies and a French one—Campbell Soup, Hain Celestial and Danone—each snapped up a maker of organic baby food. Coca-Cola and Unilever, an Anglo-Dutch titan, have long bought companies outright or invested in them. Both General Mills and Campbell have launched their own venture-capital arms.
Such strategies may eventually make CPG firms even more like big pharmaceutical companies. They may invent few products themselves and instead either acquire small firms or join up with them, then handle marketing, distribution and regulation. That has worked decently well for drugmakers. Yet consumers are more fickle when buying skin cream than a patent-protected cancer drug. A CPG firm may pay a bundle to buy a startup, only to see its products prove a fad. And cutting costs expands margins, but may depress sales.
Despite such conundrums, executives remain bullish. Tim Cofer, Mondelez’s chief growth officer, maintains that wise cuts and reinvestment will position the firm well. “This is about the scale of a $30 billion global snacking powerhouse,” he declares, “and at the same time the speed, the agility, the dexterity” of a startup.
Others are gloomier. EY, a consultancy, recently surveyed CPG executives. Eight in ten doubted their company could adapt to customer demand. Kristina Rogers of EY posits that firms may need to rethink their business, not just trim costs and sign deals. “Is the billion-dollar brand,” she wonders, “still a robust model?”



A UN-appointed tribunal dismisses China’s claims in the South China Sea





BY EJECTING its neighbours’ forces, building up its navy and constructing artificial islands, China has for years sought to assert vast and ambiguous territorial claims in the South China Sea. These alarm its neighbours and have led to military confrontations. They also challenge America’s influence in Asia. Now the Permanent Court of Arbitration, an international tribunal in The Hague, has declared China’s “historic claims” in the South China Sea invalid. It was an unexpectedly wide-ranging and clear-cut ruling, and it has enraged China. The judgment could change the politics of the South China Sea and, in the long run, force China to choose what sort of country it wants to be—one that supports rules-based global regimes, or one that challenges them in pursuit of great-power status.
The case was brought by the Philippines in 2013, after China grabbed control of a reef, called Scarborough Shoal, about 220 miles (350km) north-west of Manila. The case had wider significance, though, because of the South China Sea itself. About a third of world trade passes through its sea lanes, including most of China’s oil imports. It contains large reserves of oil and gas. But it matters above all because it is a place of multiple overlapping maritime claims and a growing military presence (Chinese troops are pictured above on one of the sea’s islands). America had two aircraft carriers in the sea lately; on the eve of the court’s ruling, China’s navy was staging a live-fire exercise there. Above all it is a region where two world-views collide. These are an American idea of rules-based international order and a Chinese one based on what it regards as “historic rights” that trump any global law.
China claims it has such rights in the South China Sea, and that they long predate the current international system. Chinese seafarers, the government says, discovered and named islands in the region centuries ago. It says the country also has ancestral fishing rights. In early July, by happy coincidence, a state television company began a mini-series about the experience of Chinese fishermen in the 1940s, reinforcing China’s view. These rights are said to exist within a “nine-dash line” (still usually called that, though Chinese maps began showing ten dashes in 2013 to bring Taiwan more clearly into the fold). It is a tongue-shaped claim that slurps more than 1,500km down from the southern coast of China and laps up almost all the South China Sea (see map).





The court comprehensively rejected China’s view of things, ruling that only claims consistent with the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) were valid. Under UNCLOS, which came into force in 1982 and which China ratified in 1996, maritime rights derive from land, not history. Countries may claim an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) up to 200 nautical miles (370km) off their coasts, or around islands. Based on this, the tribunal ruled that the nine-dash line had no standing. The judges wrote that there was “no legal basis” for China to claim historic rights within it. UNCLOS, they said, took precedence.
Until now, China has not specified the exact meaning of the nine-dash line. It is not clear, for example, whether the country claims everything within the line as its sovereign possession or merely the islands and their surrounding waters. Even if the claim were confined to the islands, the ruling undermined that. The tribunal said that none of the Spratly Islands (where China’s island-building has been concentrated) count as islands in international law. Therefore, none qualifies for an EEZ.
Adding insult to injury, the court ruled that China had been building on rocks that were visible only at low tide, and hence not eligible to claim territorial waters. It said this had violated the sovereign rights of the Philippines, which has an EEZ covering them. So, too, had China’s blocking of Philippine fishing and oil-exploration activities. The court ruled that Chinese vessels had unlawfully created a “serious risk of collision” with Philippine ships in the area, and that China had violated its obligations under UNCLOS to look after fragile ecosystems. Chinese fishermen, the judges said, had harvested endangered species, such as sea turtles and coral, while the authorities turned a blind eye.
China refused to take any part in the court’s proceedings and said it would not “accept, recognise or execute” the verdict. As a member of UNCLOS it is supposed to obey the court, but there is no enforcement mechanism. The condemnation of China’s actions is so thorough, however, that it risks provoking China into a response that threatens regional security as much as its recent building of what one American admiral has called a “great wall of sand”. Other countries, and America, are nervously waiting to see whether China’s furious rhetoric will be matched by threatening behaviour by its armed forces.
In 2014 the Indian government of Narendra Modi quietly accepted the court’s ruling against it in a case brought by Bangladesh over a dispute in the Bay of Bengal. But President Xi Jinping, who has supervised China’s recent efforts to reinforce its claims in the South China Sea, would find it very hard to do the same. He is preparing to carry out a sweeping reshuffle of the Communist leadership next year; foes would be quick to accuse him of selling out the country were he to appear weak.
Taiwan’s denunciation of the ruling as “completely unacceptable” will give succour to Mr Xi. The positions both of China and Taiwan are based on claims made by Chiang Kai-shek when he ruled China, before he fled to Taiwan in 1949. That Taiwan maintains the same stance under Tsai Ing-wen, who took over as the island’s president in May, is even more of a boost. Ms Tsai’s party normally abhors anything suggesting that China and Taiwan have the same territorial interests. Yet the day after the court ruling, Ms Tsai appeared on a Taiwanese frigate before it set sail to defend what she called “Taiwan’s national interests” in the South China Sea, where Taiwan controls the largest of the Spratlys.





In China, raging rhetoric quickly reached stratospheric levels. Global Times, a particularly hawkish newspaper, called the ruling “even more shameless than the worst prediction”. The government warned its neighbours that it would “take all necessary measures” to protect its interests. The social-networking accounts of Communist Party newspapers brimmed with bellicosity. “Let’s cut the crap,” said a user called Yunfu, “and show them our sovereignty rights through war.” Rumours that China was preparing for a fight ran so rife that the normally taciturn ministry of defence stepped in to deny them.
It is thought unlikely that China would quit UNCLOS: that would reinforce the impression that China is a law unto itself and do grave damage to its global image. (America has not ratified UNCLOS, but observes it in practice.) More likely is that it will set up an Air Defence Identification Zone (ADIZ) in the South China Sea, like the one it declared over the East China Sea in 2013 after a spat with Japan over islands there. The day after the ruling, Liu Zhenmin, a deputy foreign minister, talked about China’s right to do so. Aircraft flying through China’s existing ADIZ have to report their location to the authorities or face unspecified “emergency defensive measures”. America’s military aircraft ignore this, and would do the same if a southern one were imposed. That could add to the already serious risk that the two countries’ fighter jets might end up in a confrontation.
A no-less-worrying possibility is that China might start building on Scarborough Shoal, where the court case began. Radar, aircraft and missiles based there would be a close-up threat to the Philippines and military bases that are used by American forces. In March President Barack Obama reportedly warned Mr Xi that reclamation on the shoal would threaten America’s interests and could cause military escalation.
Still, in the short term, there are reasons China might be cautious. It is hosting an annual meeting of G20 leaders in September. It is spending lavishly on preparations. The last thing it wants is for countries to boycott the event or spoil it with recriminations over its response to the verdict.
No one in the region seems to want to make life harder for China at the moment. The Philippines, for example, is going out of its way not to crow. “If it’s favourable to us,” said the new president, Rodrigo Duterte, just before the ruling, “let’s talk.”



In graphics: A guide to the South China Sea


Vietnam and Malaysia, which might conceivably launch copycat cases in the court, both put out measured statements supporting peaceful resolution of the disputes. The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), a ten-country grouping which includes four of the states in dispute with China, had little to say. Several of its members wanted ASEAN to take a firm stance against China’s claims—and an unusually strong statement released by ASEAN in June looked like the beginning of that. But it was retracted, mysteriously, within hours, making the organisation look weak and ineffective, as usual.
There may be a glimmer of hope from China itself. By one reading, it may be in the process of clarifying that the nine-dash line is less sweeping than it looks. A government statement in response to the ruling mentions both historic rights and the nine-dash line repeatedly—but always separately, without linking them. Andrew Chubb of the University of Western Australia says this might mean that China is preparing quietly to say that the line does not indicate that China has historic rights to everything inside it, but rather, that it denotes an area within which China claims sovereignty over islands.
As the verdict showed, that would still mean that many of China’s claims are inconsistent with UNCLOS. But it might result in China becoming less eager to patrol the nine-dash line right up to the edge. That may not seem much. However, in the aftermath of the ruling, the biggest question facing the countries of the South China Sea is whether Asia’s oceans will be governed by the rules of UNCLOS or whether those rules will be bent to accommodate China’s rising power. Even a small sign that the rules will not be bent as far as some hawks in China would like could be important.



Diet control





AS THE results of the election for the Diet’s upper house rolled in on July 10th, Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, beamed. And why not? This was his third sweeping election victory since he and his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) returned to power in late 2012. It was won despite a sputtering economy and mounting doubts about how Mr Abe might fix it. And it moves him a big step closer to achieving a lifelong political ambition: unshackling Japan from the constitution imposed by America on a defeated country after the second world war.
With its junior partner, Komeito, the LDP won 70 out of the 121 seats up for grabs (half the upper house), admittedly on a low turnout. It nevertheless gives the ruling coalition firm control over the upper house. And, with support from like-minded parties and independents, Mr Abe can now claim a two-thirds majority in both upper and lower houses. That, in theory, gives him the long-coveted supermajorities to present constitutional changes to voters for approval by referendum.

First, though, Mr Abe must turn to boosting the economy. For all the trumpeted “Abenomics” of the past three years, including monetary and fiscal stimulus, output is forecast to grow at just 0.9% this year. Business confidence is flat, wages are stagnant and, though jobs are easy enough to find, consumption is sluggish. Not for the first time, Abenomics needs a reboot.
In the circumstances, it is remarkable that the opposition Democratic Party (DP) landed so few punches. It lost 15 seats. Post-Brexit turmoil in Europe may have spurred voters to cling to the stability that the LDP represents. The DP’s tactical agreement to co-ordinate fielding candidates with three disparate opposition parties unsettled many voters. Gambling all on its opposition to constitutional change, the DP had few economic proposals.
Having postponed a planned rise in the consumption tax, Mr Abe has instructed the finance ministry to draw up a “supplementary” budget to be passed in a special session of the Diet, expected in mid-September. The fresh stimulus may amount to as much as ¥10 trillion ($99 billion), or 2% of GDP—to be added to the current budget deficit and national debt of about 6% and 250% of GDP respectively. Mr Abe remains wedded to the old LDP recipe of construction projects and high-speed trains. Some of the money will be raised through investment bonds which, like nearly all the finance ministry’s debt issuance these days, will be bought by the central bank, in a tight fiscal-monetary tango. There is also talk of direct cash transfers to boost consumption among targeted groups, notably the young, the working poor, women and pensioners—a variant on “helicopter money” that seems destined to be called “drone money”.





A cabinet reshuffle is likely in August, and any Buggins’-turn appointments will be presented as bringing in new reformist blood. It is possible that the finance minister, Taro Aso, will want to go. But Mr Abe knows he has to do more than change faces and push yet more stimulus. One measure hinted at for the autumn Diet session is to reform the labour market. The prime minister, his advisers say, has come to believe that the economy’s problems are structural and to do with a shrinking population and rigid work practices. Japan has a two-tier labour market of cosseted permanent staff and less-protected employees on non-regular contracts—many of them young.
That said, the political will for labour reform, or indeed much structural change of any sort, has eluded Mr Abe to date. And the Diet session has other urgent business, including passing legislation to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade deal that has yet to be passed by America’s Congress and is opposed by both presidential candidates (though Hillary Clinton’s precise views are hard to pin down).
The prime minister sees economic strength and his nationalist agenda to restore Japanese power and prestige as one combined objective. But for all the opposition’s efforts, Mr Abe ducked the debate on constitutional change during the campaign—for good reason. A pre-election survey by NHK, the public broadcaster, found only 11% of respondents thought the constitution of greater concern to them than bread-and-butter issues.
With victory in the bag, he has now called for a debate on changing the constitution, saying it is his “duty” as president of his party. Setsu Kobayashi, a constitutional scholar at Keio University in Tokyo, says that on security and constitutional matters, Mr Abe has form in pushing ahead with unpopular measures, such as a controversial law that now allows Japan to take part in collective defence with allies.
An LDP draft for a revised constitution calls for, among other things, rewriting Article 9, which renounces war, to recast the country’s “self-defence forces” as regular armed forces. Getting that draft passed will require the “art of politics”, Mr Abe said this week. China may yet prove his best ally: it reacted furiously to an international ruling on July 12th dismissing its territorial claims in the South China Sea (see article), while its navy and air force have increased their probing of the waters and air space around Japan. At present, though, the hurdles to constitutional change remain high. Natsuo Yamaguchi, Komeito’s leader, for one, has warned against tampering with the constitution’s pacifist clause.
Close advisers suggest that Mr Abe will not push for early change. Brexit, they say, has come as a stark reminder to him of how, without laying the groundwork, a referendum can divide a country and produce an unexpected and “wrong” outcome. Besides, no consensus exists on what the changes should be. While some would-be amenders (including in the DP) care about Article 9, others are more concerned with enshrining human rights or simply revamping the procedures for amending the constitution. Still others talk of a new amendment giving the prime minister and self-defence forces emergency powers after a natural disaster.
So no immediate drive for constitutional reform, perhaps. All the more reason, then, to judge Mr Abe by his promise to transform the economy.
 



Iraq’s grim lessons





THERE has been no shortage of reports and inquiries into the Iraq war, which broke out in 2003. But after nearly seven years of toil, Sir John Chilcot and his fellow commissioners have published what future historians will regard as the definitive account of what happened and why. The lessons the Iraq Inquiry draws from 2.6m words of painstakingly accumulated evidence have almost as much relevance to American policymakers as they do to their British counterparts. The picture it paints, for all the familiarity of its main elements, is a devastating one of individual and institutional failure. The verdict on Tony Blair, Britain’s prime minister at the time, is not that he is a liar and a war criminal (as many contend), but a man steered by a fatal combination of hubris, wishful thinking and moral fervour into an ultimately disastrous course of action.
The most damning of the inquiry’s conclusions is the overarching one that, based on Britain’s professed goal of disarming Saddam Hussein (it was never explicitly regime change), military action in March 2003 was not, as Mr Blair claimed, a last resort. The attempt to deal with Iraq’s putative weapons of mass destruction (WMD) without going to war was not yet over: the UN inspection team lead by Hans Blix was getting better co-operation from the Iraqis and was pleading for more time; there was no imminent threat from Saddam; there was strong UN Security Council backing for continued inspections. In short, the inquiry judges, although military intervention might have been required in the future, an adaptive strategy of containment had plenty of life left in it.

But Mr Blair was in thrall to the military timetable set by George W. Bush, and the promise the prime minister had made him in July the previous year to “be with you, whatever”. If Britain had decided on the eve of the invasion to withdraw its forces, the damage to the relationship with America would have been far greater than if Mr Blair had earlier exercised more caution in his commitment to the enterprise.
Too good to check
That lack of caution, combined with a disregard for process that bordered on the feckless, was a recurring theme in the run-up to the war. Mr Blair never had any doubts that the intelligence assessments of Iraq’s WMD and missile programmes were accurate. The belief that the Iraqi regime had chemical and biological weapons, was determined to preserve and enhance them, and had developed sophisticated methods of concealment was deeply ingrained. The intelligence was not fabricated, but nor was it questioned or challenged in the way it should have been, given how much was resting on it.
Regarding the “dodgy dossier” of September 2002, the inquiry does not suggest intelligence was improperly included in it or that the British government improperly influenced its text. The problem lay in the judgments made by the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC), which assesses the output of the intelligence-gathering agencies, and “owned” the dossier, and Mr Blair’s use of the words “beyond doubt” in his foreword. By then, MI6 and Mr Blair were pumping each other up. When Mr Blix’s inspectors failed to find any WMD, the JIC, gripped by “groupthink”, put it down to the Iraqis’ talent for subterfuge. As the date of the invasion drew near, concerns about the quality of sources had crept in, but the spooks still reckoned the weapons would be found and they would be vindicated.
The report warns of the dangers of explicitly using intelligence to support a policy decision without repeatedly testing the assumptions underlying it, and of allowing a degree of certainty to be conveyed which such assessments rarely withstand.
On the still-vexed question of the legality of the war after the failure to obtain a resolution from the UN Security Council authorising the use of force, the inquiry demurs from expressing an opinion. But it is scathing about the contortions performed by the then-attorney-general, Lord Goldsmith, to come up with the goods. When the armed forces said that they needed more than just his view that a “reasonable case” could be made that resolution 1441 revived the authorisation in a previous resolution dating from the first Gulf war in 1990, he swiftly came up with what he called a “better view”. This was based on little more than Mr Blair assuring him that Iraq had committed further material breaches of resolution 1441.


British military engagements and deaths, in graphics


After determining that it was neither right nor necessary to invade Iraq in March 2003, the main focus of the inquiry is on the preparations for what followed. It is hard to exaggerate the sheer awfulness of what emerges from the report. Everyone in government, not least Mr Blair, paid constant lip-service to the need for proper planning for the aftermath of the invasion. The Ministry of Defence declared in December 2002 that the post-conflict phase of operations would be “strategically decisive”; the military planners made the case for a major civilian component in the post-conflict deployment. But nothing happened. Both the Foreign Office and the Department for International Development looked away. No individual or department was assigned even to look at the issues or suggest ways of mitigating known risks.
The assumption was that America would draw up the plan and that the UN would have a big post-conflict role, bringing in other countries to share the burden of peacekeeping and reconstruction. Even in the face of strong resistance from Washington to the idea of the UN taking over (matched only by the UN’s disinclination to do so), the British government sat on its hands, reluctant to contemplate the warning from officials that it could soon find itself “drawn into a huge commitment of UK resources for a highly complex task of administration and law and order for an uncertain period”.
What made matters worse was the very late decision for British forces to enter Iraq with the Americans from the south, after Turkey said it would not allow the coalition to enter from its territory. The British, who had expected to find themselves working with their old friends the Kurds, were landed with Basra and three other mainly Shiite south-eastern provinces, while the Americans stormed on to Baghdad. There were several consequences, all bad. The larger-than-planned-for force (three brigades) needed for the south had to be cobbled together at the last moment; there was only patchy understanding of the place they would be going to and little time to analyse the risks; and Basra was a long way from Baghdad, where all the post-invasion decisions would be made.



“With you, whatever”: Blair’s promise

Astonishingly, despite acceding to British generals’ demand to “go in big” (Britain contributed about 30% of the tanks for the invasion), Mr Blair extracted no promise from Mr Bush about joint decision-making. The result was that the Coalition Provisional Authority in Baghdad was an almost wholly American show and the junior occupying power had virtually no ability to influence policy decisions, such as the disbandment of the Iraqi army and “de-Baathification”, which were to have terrible results. The inquiry leaves it an open question whether a stronger British voice would have made things better.
It might not have if the performance of the army, once the successful initial military campaign was over, is any guide. Like their American counterparts, British generals were complacent about what they expected to be a fairly benign security environment and were taken by surprise when it deteriorated precipitously after the invasion. A shortage of the right equipment quickly became evident when British soldiers started being blown up by local militias. Yet little was done to improve matters, not because of a lack of money but because the army had not prepared itself psychologically for a long occupation.
The issue of the lightly armoured Snatch Land Rover illustrated the generals’ thinking. Serviceable in Northern Ireland, they became “mobile coffins” in Iraq because of their lack of resistance to improvised explosive devices. Yet the army resisted replacing them with something better: it thought it would be leaving in a year or so, and wanted to preserve a costly new armoured fighting-vehicle programme which was later cancelled.





Surge, then scram
A lack of helicopters was exacerbated when the generals succeeded in pushing for the ill-fated deployment of 3,300 troops to Helmand, one of Afghanistan’s most volatile provinces. Less than a year after the invasion of Iraq, they had concluded that there was little more they could achieve there and that Helmand offered the prospect of doing some proper soldiering. The inquiry says that from the middle of 2005, decisions on resources in Iraq were being shaped by the anticipated demands of the campaign in Afghanistan.
A direct result of this policy was what the report describes as the “humiliating” decision in 2007 to acquiesce to militia dominance in Basra by exchanging detainees in return for an end to the targeting of British forces. Just as the ultimately successful American surge was getting under way, the remaining 4,000 British troops were holed up at Basra airport, preparing to quit. It was a shaming and miserable end to Britain’s involvement in Iraq.
In a 6,500-word statement issued after the report’s publication, Mr Blair claims that it makes clear “there were no lies, Parliament and Cabinet were not misled, there was no ‘secret deal’ with America, intelligence was not falsified, and the decision was made in good faith.” True, up to a point. But Mr Blair forfeits sympathy when he continues: “The aftermath turned out more hostile, protracted and bloody than we ever imagined.” Hindsight is not an excuse that the inquiry accepts. Before contemplating any similar undertaking, it advises, there must be a clear understanding of the theatre of operations; a hard-headed assessment of risks; realistic objectives; and sufficient resources. It concludes: “All of these elements were lacking in the UK’s approach to its role in post-conflict Iraq.”
 



The big test for the pound: Funding the deficit





THE pound has been the biggest post-Brexit casualty in the financial markets. It has fallen from almost $1.50 to around $1.30 against the dollar; less so against the euro which itself has been dragged down by Brexit worries. The immediate impact for British citizens is a cut in their standard of living; it costs more to buy goods from abroad, whether it be imported commodities or foreign holidays.





Of course, currency depreciation can be a very useful tool for countries when they have become locked in to an overvalued exchange rate. Many people will recall Britain’s departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992 when the economy perked up quickly and the inflationary impact was limited. But the circumstances were very different; interest rates were 12% and were brought down rapidly while there was a lot of spare capacity in the economy (unemployment was 10%). Now interest rates are just 0.5% and unemployment is 5%.
The big question, as David Bowers and Ian Harnett of Absolute Strategy Research explain, is the British current-account deficit. At around 7% of GDP, this deficit is not just a peacetime record, it is bigger than the shortfalls seen in World War One (but not WWII). This means that Britain has to attract foreign capital; it has been very successful in doing so via foreign direct investment (FDI). But that was, in large part, because of Britain’s place as part of the EU. Last year, a survey by Ernst & Young reported that:
With 72% of investors citing access to the European single market as important to Britain’s attractiveness, the referendum has the potential to change perceptions of Britain dramatically, posing a major risk to FDI. Our survey indicates that 31% of investors will either freeze or reduce investment until the outcome is known.
All this has now been thrown into doubt. Of course, one element of the Brexit campaign argued that Britain could become more open to international investment outside the EU; a kind of Singapore of Europe. However, as this blog pointed out before the vote, this camp sat uneasily with the more nativist, anti-globalisation and anti-immigration side of the campaign. Until the outcome of the post-Brexit negotiations become clear (and the talks may not even start until next year), investors may hold back. Indeed, when it comes to the property market (one source of FDI), there are signs that investors have already done so.
As with everything in economics, things can get back into balance at the right price. The pound can fall so that British assets are so cheap that they seem attractive. But ASR argues this may require a prolonged decline to cheap levels; they estimate that fair value for the pound/dollar rate is around $1.42. Eliminating the deficit could require the pound to fall to parity with the dollar.
The pound did get almost that low in the mid-1980s (that was largely down to a soaring dollar, rather than any great British problems). Such a fall would drive up inflation significantly, squeezing living standards (the problem that may have inspired some voters to back Brexit in the first place).
It would, of course, be good for exports. But as the chart shows, Britain has already seen one big depreciation in the pound since 2000. It narrowed the current-account deficit for a while but the effect was short-lived. Recent evidence does not show that currency depreciations lead to a big gain in market share for exporting nations. The first issue is that world trade is growing fairly sluggishly. The second, as ASR points out, is that companies may decide not to cut their prices in foreign currency terms but to take the higher foreign currency receipts (in domestic currency terms) as extra profit. 
A third issue is that globalisation means that business is conducted through “value chains”, in which products are assembled or distributed in many markets. These chains take time to assemble and companies are unlikely to unpick them because of currency shifts. This paper published on Vox explains that:
By disentangling the impact of exchange rate changes on trade results, we have shown that the underlying assumption of the ‘currency wars’ discussion – that devaluations bring about substantial export gains – may be severely flawed. Non-price/non-exchange rate factors often appear to explain the lion’s share of export outcomes, and this is particularly the case when exports are measured in value-added terms. 

Indeed, it is worth noting that a deficit can fall in two ways; a rise in exports or a decline in imports, thanks to a collapse in domestic demand (as in 2009). That route tends to be more common. But it won’t be what voters thought they were getting as they clearly didn’t believe the warnings of economists before the vote. 



A probe to Jupiter has arrived successfully





IT WAS exactly rocket science. In the early hours of Tuesday morning, cruising at a speed of around a quarter of a million kilometres an hour, some 868m km from Earth, and with Jupiter, the solar system’s biggest planet, looming in its cameras, a small space-going robot called Juno began a delicate task. This was to slam on the brakes and slow itself enough to allow it to be captured by Jupiter’s gravity.
Orbital insertions are difficult manoeuvres at the best of times. But Juno was beyond any human help. It had about half an hour to complete its job and, even at the speed of light, messages from the probe back to its masters on Earth would take longer than that to arrive. If anything went wrong it would therefore have to cope on its own.

In the end, everything went flawlessly. Back on Earth, watching humans breathed a sigh of relief: “To know we can go to bed tonight not worrying about what is going to happen tomorrow is just awesome,” said Diane Brown of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which built Juno.
Over the next couple of years, in a series of looping orbits designed to minimise its exposure to Jupiter’s fierce radiation belts, the probe will poke and prod the giant planet. Jupiter, along with Saturn, is one of the solar system’s two “gas giants”—big planets with extremely thick atmospheres made mostly of hydrogen and helium. It is more than twice as massive as all the other planets in the solar system put together. But it has had only one other probe, Galileo, which arrived in 1995, dedicated to its study.
Juno will examine Jupiter’s atmosphere, characterise its magnetic fields and try to determine whether there is a rocky core below the deep, roiling atmosphere, or whether the hydrogen and helium simply get denser and denser the further down you go. NASA also hopes that understanding Jupiter—especially how and where it formed—will shed light on how the early solar system evolved. That will help astronomers understand planetary systems revolving around stars other than the sun. The study of such exoplanets has thrown up hundreds of examples of “hot Jupiters”, giant orbs that orbit close to their parent stars. Every model of planetary formation says these could not have formed in situ. The assumption, therefore, is that they formed elsewhere before wandering closer to their parents. If Jupiter shows signs of having done something similar, that could help the understanding of millions of other gas giants elsewhere in the galaxy, too. 
Dig deeper: A mission to the giant planet (July 2016)



A tight victory hurts Malcolm Turnbull’s political authority



Austria will rerun its nightmarishly close presidential election





THE run-off in the Austrian presidential election in May was the most polarising vote in the country’s recent history. The narrow victory of the Green candidate, Alexander Van der Bellen (pictured, centre), over Norbert Hofer of the Freedom Party spared the country the embarrassment of electing the first far-right head of state in post-war Europe.
But as in a horror-movie sequel, the country will soon live through the same nightmare again. On Friday, Austria’s constitutional court annulled the election because of a string of violations in the counting of postal ballots, which made up 16% of the total. Mr Hofer’s camp had claimed that in several electoral districts the envelopes were opened before the designated time, when their voluntary observers were not present.

In a televised announcement, the high court’s president, Gerhart Holzinger, said there was no evidence that votes had been altered or manipulated. But he cited legal precedents, going back almost 90 years, ruling that even the possibility of foul play requires that the election be scrapped. If all the disputed ballots had gone to Mr Hofer, he would have edged out Mr Van der Bellen, who won by just 30,000 votes. The judge dismissed the option of a rerun limited to the disputed districts.
Mr Van der Bellen and Mr Hofer will now have to fight it out again, probably on September 25th. Both the Green and Freedom parties have promised a short campaign. Many Austrians would like to take their summer holidays in peace. More importantly, neither party has much cash left in its coffers.
A rerun of a nationwide election is unprecedented in a Western democracy. Yet the court felt it was necessary to quash any doubts about the rule of law in Austria. “A move away from legal precedence in such a sensitive election would have subjected the court to widespread criticism,” says Michael Enzinger, president of the Vienna bar association. Had the result been allowed to stand despite the numerous violations, it would have lent weight to right-wing conspiracy theories alleging that Mr Van der Bellen’s election was fraudulent. “In a democracy, there must not be any doubt about the correctness of an election,” said Christian Kern, Austria’s new Social Democratic chancellor. He replaced Werner Faymann, who stepped down in April after their party’s presidential candidate failed even to make it to the run-off.
No politician dared to criticise the constitutional court. Its investigation was meticulous: it took four days to interrogate dozens of electoral officials and observers before issuing its verdict. Yet the outcome leaves the country in shock. The first campaign split the country into warring camps. Mr Hofer’s strong showing raised fears that the Freedom Party could win the next general elections due in 2018. The grand coalition government of the Social Democrats and the centre-right People’s Party has recovered a bit in the polls following Mr Kern’s replacement of Mr Faymann, but it is still riven by internal conflicts and under pressure from weak economic growth.
The earlier campaign was dominated by the clash between Mr Hofer’s euroscepticism and Mr Van der Bellen’s support for European integration. That conflict could now grow even sharper. After Britain voted to leave the EU, Mr Hofer called for a similar referendum in Austria if the union made any new moves towards integration. The economic consequences of the Brexit vote may boost Mr Van der Bellen’s share of the vote. But Mr Hofer and his party chairman, Heinz-Christian Strache, are celebrating. In September, their mood may be more festive still. 



